# Forces and potentials in biological modeling


In the last chapter we learned to analyze the dynamics of linear dynamical systems by finding the eigenvalues of corresponding matrices. In this chapter, we will study a class of mathematical models with a classical physics pedigree. These models are based on a physical potential, which is usually given by a physical law, e.g. gravity. These systems are special, because they have a conserved quantity that is known as energy. We will learn about the consequences of such conserved quantities, and what happens when the conservation is broken and energy dissipates.

The main type of models that we will address are oscillators, with the simplest being simple springs. These models are in fact relevant for biological modeling in a variety of fields. We will apply the analysis to the study of biomolecular flexibility, to predict the preferred directions of internal motion of parts of protein molecules. The study of protein structural dynamics has important implication to understanding the mechanism of function of many biochemical systems. For example, many signaling molecules undergo conformational changes upon binding or phosphorylation, which generates changes in their biochemical actions.

The modeling section explains the basic physics of forces and potential functions. We will use examples of a single mass on a spring, and the scale up to two masses connected by a spring. In the analytic section, we will learn how to turn second order ODEs into first order dynamical systems, then find the explicit solutions for the oscillations of a simple spring. We will show how damping enters the solution, and what effect it has on conservation. We will also learn how to include external forcing in the model. In the computational section we will describe a general system of coupled linear oscillators using normal mode analysis. In the final section normal mode analysis is applied to studying the dynamics of protein structures.